[AUDIO LOGO]
>> This is a time
of savage grace.
If you want awakening--
Savage grace, yes.
>> Because this time, we'll
strip you of your fantasies
and illusions and offer you
a path to radical union with
the divine.
If you're brave enough.
The great Hindu mystics tell
us that there are four stages.
Difficult, serious,
dangerous, and then lethal.
>> Where are we on that scale?
>> We're in dangerous.
>> Oh.
Oh, dangerous.
>> --On the cusp of lethal.
>> All right.
>> It's a dying and a
birthing at the same time.
Be aware of the birthing
because that will give you
purpose, meaning, and joy.
The triumph of the
depravity of lies
is a sign that extinction is
now possible for the human race.
>> If we don't get real.
>> I'm here to help
people, at this moment,
die into life so that
they can know what I am.
So many of us now know which is
that there is a new life coming
for the world.
>>REGINA MEREDITH:
Andrew Harvey is
a mystic who believes that our
shadow is our greatest ally,
and the only path forward
is to make friends with it.
This is the one
thing many people
in the spiritual communities
want to avoid like the plague.
But look around the world.
Truth time.
It's so good to see
you again, Andrew.
It's been a few years.
>>ANDREW HARVEY: It has
but how lovely to be back.
>>REGINA: Well, I have
to say, because it's
been a few years, that means we
have all, a big new audience.
And I can't help myself.
I have to share how I first
saw you, met you, and fell
in love with you.
It was at a New Age conference.
>>ANDREW: Oh, my goodness.
>>REGINA: Yes, and I believe
it was in Vancouver, BC.
And Barbara Marx
Hubbard, a lot of them.
>>ANDREW: Oh, God.
Oh, that one.
Yes.
>>REGINA: Jose Arguelles
and others were there,
and you got up and
spoke toward the end.
And I didn't-- I'd
heard of the great,
mystic and orator Andrew
Harvey, but I didn't know what
to expect.
Well, let's say, you
silenced the room.
You weren't silent, but
the room became silent.
And you basically said,
there's no daydream meditation
or Rainbow Bridge that's going
to get us where we need to go.
You have to do the
work, and we are not
doing the work in this room.
And you went on,
and it was like--
everyone was like this.
And I thought, oh, my
God, he speaks the truth.
[LAUGHS]
So I immediately had to--
I came up to you and said,
may I interview you right now?
You were perspiring, and
everyone was in shock.
And I said, let's
go do this now.
And you were kind enough
to grant me an interview.
>>ANDREW: Oh, God.
I never forget it.
[LAUGHS]
>>REGINA: No one will
forget that, Andrew.
>>ANDREW: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: So, Andrew,
you're a passionate man.
You're a mystical man.
You have a huge heart
and are full of love,
but you also see the
danger and the times we're
in, which you're calling a
really dark night of the soul.
Evolutionarily for
humanity, we all
chose to be here at this time.
So, please.
>>ANDREW: Well, first of
all, it's absolutely lovely
to be with you again because
I remember our meeting also
with great joy.
And I remember the
wild interview--
>>REGINA: Oh, yeah.
>>ANDREW: That followed.
Yes.
You know, this is the worst
and the best of times.
It's terrifying because
the entire world,
the whole of humanity
is being plunged
into a global dark night.
A series of unspeakably
difficult crises, all of which
are manifesting
at the same time.
But for those of
us who are mystics
and who've been through
dark nights ourselves, when
a dark night of such
intensity appears,
we know that something
amazing is being prepared.
When you look at the
great evolutionary mystics
of humanity, they
all know that we
were going to come
to a period like this
because we've been living in
hubris, fantasy, and delusion.
But they also all know that
this crisis has been perfectly
designed by sublime, divine
intelligence to burn away
our illusions, to initiate us
into the truth of who we are,
and to help us come together
to co-create a wholly,
new way of being and doing--
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
And not only that, I think
it's important for us
to keep in mind that our
souls-- we chose this.
We chose to be
incarnate right now.
Everyone.
People can say, oh, I would
have never chosen this,
or what a horrid
time to be alive.
No, you chose it.
>>ANDREW: But you
chose it for a reason.
>>REGINA: We all
>>ANDREW: The real
reason I believe
is that this is a
time of savage grace.
If you want awakening--
>>REGINA: Savage grace.
>>ANDREW: --here's the
time because this time,
we'll strip you of your
fantasies and illusions
and offer you a path to
radical union with the divine.
If you're brave enough,
if you're wild enough,
if you do the work, this time,
we'll give you everything.
>>REGINA: Radical grace?
I love that.
So the way you describe
the dark night of the soul
is when you've come to a
point, where life is now-- you
can't find the
meaning to it anymore.
And it's a kind of
malaise and depression
that overcomes humanity.
And we're seeing a lot of that.
There's a lot of suicide.
There's a lot of every
kind of substance--
>>ANDREW: Violence.
>>REGINA: --abuse on the planet.
>>ANDREW: Growth of
authoritarianism.
>>REGINA: All of it.
>>ANDREW: Paralysis.
Everything.
Yes.
>>REGINA: And so most people
or people here are awake.
The people watching you
now are awake but also,
not knowing how to
proceed forward.
We've come out of the dark night
of the pandemic, where people
had been siloed themselves
into taking positions, choosing
sides and hating on one another.
>>ANDREW: I know.
>>REGINA: This is the
worst part of all.
So, talk about that for just
a moment, about the division
of consciousness, and being
pitted against each other
through media and social media.
And then I want to
go into the fact
that this is actually
an initiatory process.
And we'll talk about it.
>>ANDREW: Well, one way of
looking at this dark night
is looking at it as
the Hindu mystics asked
us to look at it, as Kali Yuga.
And the great Hindu mystics tell
us that there are four stages.
Difficult, serious,
dangerous, and then lethal.
>>REGINA: Where are
we on that scale?
>>ANDREW: We're in the last--
>>REGINA: Lethal.
>>ANDREW: --part of dangerous.
>>REGINA: Oh.
Oh, dangerous.
>>ANDREW: We're on
the cusp of lethal.
>>REGINA: All right.
All right.
>>ANDREW: So in this stage--
and this is known.
They've written about it.
In this stage, there's
terrible division.
Yes.
>>REGINA: Everything has stages.
Waves of consciousness.
Up and down.
>>ANDREW: Up and down.
And in this stage,
there's going to be
terrible suffering,
terrible division,
people hating each other
for a ridiculous reasons.
>>REGINA: And it's cosmic.
>>ANDREW: And it's cosmic.
>>REGINA: It's not just here.
>>ANDREW: It's not just here.
>>REGINA: So go ahead.
>>ANDREW: It's a process.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>ANDREW: And it's
a process which
is designed to
really wake people up
to the necessity of diving
deep into mystical practice,
so that they can find
out who they really are,
and go forward in sacred,
compassionate action
to help build a wholly
new way of living.
So it's going to get very much
worse even than it is now.
Alas.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>ANDREW: But it has to
because we're incredibly sick.
And the horror that
we're going through
is chemotherapy for the cancer
of selfishness and divisiveness
that unfortunately, we
become possessed by.
But when you know what
the dark night truly is,
which is a birthing
process, that
doesn't mean you just relax.
It doesn't mean
you just say, oh,
it's going to be born
naturally, the new humanity.
It means that you dedicate
your whole being--
>>REGINA: Oh, yeah, your
consciousness, awareness...
>>ANDREW: --to the new birth
that is trying to come through.
>>REGINA: Major
course correction.
>>ANDREW: Everything.
A major course correction in
every aspect of your life.
>>REGINA: Well, we're
watching it in institutions.
And as the astrology
is lining up,
it looks like we have a
lot more change ahead.
>>ANDREW: Oh, yes.
>>REGINA: For several
more years at least,
in the falling of institutions
that we're familiar with.
And we depend upon it even.
>>ANDREW: Yes.
>>REGINA: They
have to transform.
>>ANDREW: --just
about the darkness.
I mean, think about
all the wonderful light
that's appearing too.
The amazing new visions of the
future that people are having.
The breakthroughs in energy.
We can dwell too
much on the darkness.
It's important to
see it and face it,
but let's look at all
the light coming through.
It has to.
Yes.
>>REGINA: But it
has to break down
to let the new come in.This is
just a natural process, just
like cellular growth and death.
>>ANDREW: Yes.
>>REGINA: To be replaced
with fresh cells in our body.
So we have to say, it's OK.
We have to be OK with what
falls apart in our lives,
and then be ready to be a
co-creator in what we're
going to be giving birth to.
But the co-creation part
is really important.
That's action.
>>ANDREW: That's
the crucial plot.
>>REGINA: Yes, "Radical
Regeneration," your book.
Your other one I did with
you was "Radical Passion."
>>ANDREW: Yes.
>>REGINA: You're about action.
>>ANDREW: Yes, it's very
easy to dwell on the dark,
but what I encourage
people to do
is to develop what
I call "birth eyes."
In the middle of all this
madness and chaos and horror
are appearing extraordinary
new visions of the future.
Amazing breakthroughs
in new energy.
Extraordinary,
ordinary human beings
who are risking their
lives to stand up
for democracy and justice
such as the women in Iran.
>>REGINA: Oh, yeah.
>>ANDREW: So what
this process is--
it's a dying and a
birthing at the same time.
Be aware of the birthing
because that will give you
purpose, meaning, and joy.
And dedicate yourself to be one
of the birthers in whatever way
that is most natural to you.
>>REGINA: You're just divine.
Thank you.
Everything you say has
truth, but it's golden
because it has that
mystic quality to it.
And you say when we go through
this kind of mass depression
of sorts, during the breakdown,
during these periods,
it's a chance for us to
look at the repressed
contents of our
subconscious mind
because they're now
going to show themselves.
>>ANDREW: Everything's
going to come up
because you're going to
discover that you never
were as righteous as
you thought you were.
That there were lots
of hidden motives--
>>REGINA: That's disappointing.
>>ANDREW: That's-- no, it's
exciting because it made you
feel separate and
spoiled and wonderful.
And let's get real, we need to
all be far more compassionate.
>>REGINA: Well, in
the New Age community
is particularly complicit in
that the way it was run before.
And that is also
coming to pass now.
>>ANDREW: I hope so.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>ANDREW: It needs to go
through a massive revolution.
>>REGINA: Yes, a mature act
and action-oriented spiritual
process is what's replacing
it now and getting like you
say, roll the sleeves up.
And start letting the
unconscious contents
show themselves to you and
the less flattering sides--
>>ANDREW: Yes
>>REGINA: --of our own character
that need this maturation.
>>ANDREW: But there's
tremendous energy hidden
in those repressed sides.
Hidden energy of passion and
hidden energy of compassion.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>ANDREW: Because so many people
went on the spiritual path
to feel superior.
Now, the Mother's organized
this terrible crisis in which
we are all feeling at a loss.
So we are all being humbled.
We are all being
more compassionate
because we realize that
others are suffering also.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>ANDREW: And that gives us
a new level of skillful means
with each other.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>ANDREW: We can face
each other as human beings
and reach out and
say, what do you need?
What are you battling with?
This is what I am battling with.
Does it resonate with you?
Let's help each other
get through this.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Now, one of the
confounding parts of it
is in this kind of
spoiled character
that humanity has taken on in
recent times in this decline
to awaken us is that
we've untethered ourselves
from objective truth.
>>ANDREW: Yeah, oh, God.
>>REGINA: And we're now
in a post-truth world.
And you and I are
both very concerned
and passionate about
this topic, so please.
>>ANDREW: Well, the triumph
of the depravity of lies
is a sign that extinction is
now possible for the human race.
>>REGINA: If we don't get real.
>>ANDREW: If we don't get real.
And if we don't agree on
some established facts.
We have to agree that
there is a climate crisis.
We have to agree
that capitalism,
in its current manifestation,
just isn't working.
There are too many people living
in too dreadful circumstances.
We have to agree that we
cannot go on treating animals
in the way that we're doing
because a million species are
on the verge of total vanishing.
So unless the truth, which
is very difficult to face
gets through to us, we
won't be able to work
with what we need to work
with to build a new world.
You can't build a new world
out of lies and out of denial.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>ANDREW: You can only
build a new world out
of facing where you are, going
very deep into yourself to find
the divine consciousness that
we're all secretly one with,
and coming together
in sacred action.
That's the way forward.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
But you're going--
a word pops up
that people utter all the time.
When you take the totality
of it in, you're overwhelmed.
You think, oh, my God.
There's too much
to even look at.
All I can do is just--
let me do my little part well,
and let other people address
the bigger issues.
Well, now on one hand, there
are people who were born to
and designed to take on the big
issues and move them forward.
But you say that everyone
needs to be aware and do
a little part, even a tiny part.
>>ANDREW: When people say
to me, oh, I don't think I
can take on all of this.
I say to them
tenderly but firmly,
you tremendously
underestimate yourself--
>>REGINA: True.
>>ANDREW: --because you don't
yet know who you really are.
If you took your spiritual
practice more seriously,
the divine is ready to flood
you with power and strength
on a level that you
cannot yet imagine.
I know this from my own
life because in order
to be the kind of teacher
that I've tried to be,
to bring what I hope
is the truth to people,
I've gone through many multiple
hells and great sufferings.
But I have always been saved,
helped, redeemed, transformed,
and given the strength
to go forward.
So I know whereof I speak.
So I am just saying
to people, I get
why you feel paralyzed
and despairing
but have faith in the great
message of the great mystics.
Have faith in
spiritual practice.
You will find.
You won't be
overwhelmed by what's
happening because you
realize that what's happening
is happening out of
a fierce love that
truly wants one humanity to end
so that another can be born.
And participate in that birth
and you'll have more joy
than you can stand.
>>REGINA: So true.
You're talking about
connecting with source.
>>ANDREW: Connecting with source
and connecting with each other.
>>REGINA: And each other.
>>ANDREW: And each other.
>>REGINA: And we don't--
unless you've had a near-death
experience or a Kundalini
awakening, almost all of which
happens accidentally to people,
most people have not
experienced that rush
that you're speaking of, of all
of the support and energy that
comes in when it's needed.
>>ANDREW: --they can.
Nothing--
>>REGINA: You can.
It's all right there.
You can call it in.
>>ANDREW: Yes, you can
start doing practices.
Just start one.
Just say the name of God by
whatever name you love God.
You'll find that if
you do it sincerely,
it will open doors you
didn't even know existed.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>ANDREW: There are such
powerful simple practices
which if people get with them
right now instead of feeling
depleted and paralyzed
and in denial,
you'll see that you'll
be given the strength
to stand what's happening.
You'll be given the insight
that a birth is being prepared,
and you'll be given the energy
to go forward and do things
that you never imagined
that you were capable of.
I'll give you one example.
>>REGINA: I was just
going to ask you for one.
Perfect.
>>ANDREW: I've been to this
amazing country called Namibia,
which has taken my breath away.
It's astounding.
It's naked glory, and
it's God without clothes.
Beyond dogma.
It's just the most
amazing place.
And I heard of a
person there called--
I won't mention her name.
But what she decided
years ago, 10 years ago--
she was in Minnesota.
She was living an ordinary kind
of life, and she was happy.
And then she saw
that all the cheetahs
were disappearing in Namibia.
And suddenly, for no
reason, she decided
she was going to
save the cheetahs.
This is a middle-class woman in
an ordinary part of Minnesota.
She told her husband.
The husband said, you don't
know anything about cheetahs.
She said, but I can learn.
Anyway, she went to
Namibia with $10,000.
She poured her energies
out, and now, there
are twice as many cheetahs as
there were when she turned up.
She would never have
imagined that she was going
to do something like that.
She just followed the
voice of her heart.
She had the guts to do
it, and the universe
organized her success.
>>REGINA: I love it.
>>ANDREW: That will happen to
people if they trust enough.
>>REGINA: I love it.
Now, do you mind if
I read a little poem?
It's kind of along
the line of what we're
speaking of from your book.
>>ANDREW: Not in the slightest.
No, God.
>>REGINA: This book.
It's like, "Turn Me to
Gold: 108 poems of Kabir,"
and you've translated.
And you have wonderful
photographs from Brett Hurd.
This is a book you
want to just sit with.
>>ANDREW: This is your book now.
>>REGINA: You gave it to me.
I know.
And I just-- oh, the
photography and Kabir.
So this particular poem
says, "This whole world
is a field of action.
You plow it to
raise a rich crop,
but the wild deer of attachment
ruins the harvest, and most
return empty-handed
to the barn."
>>ANDREW: I know.
>>REGINA: So let's talk about
this because as you say,
it's a field of
action which you plow.
>>ANDREW: Right.
>>REGINA: But attachment.
So talk about what
this poem from Kabir
means in context of what we
were just speaking about even.
>>ANDREW: Well, you
said it when you said,
"We all chose to be here."
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>ANDREW: And I think
our fundamental choice
to be in this time was for
the kind of total awakening
that this time can give
because it's so ferocious.
So--
>>REGINA: So attachment.
>>ANDREW: If you come to this
time and don't realize that
what it's asking you to
do is to rid yourself
of your attachments, and
illusions, and plunge,
into divine love, and offer
your whole life up to love
and service--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>ANDREW: You're missing
the point of having
chosen this incarnation.
So get with the evolutionary
program of the divine.
Accept its terms.
Do the work.
Turn up, and you will
go full to the barn.
You'll go with your arms
full of the golden wheat
of your own sacred
actions and realizations.
And you'll return home joyful,
knowing who you really are.
>>REGINA: But you may have to
go through a heartbreak or two,
and that's OK.
>>ANDREW: Everybody--
>>REGINA: That's where
the maturity comes from.
>>ANDREW: The greatest
mystics have to die into life.
You have to die into life.
>>REGINA: So don't be afraid--
>>ANDREW: Don't be afraid.
>>REGINA: --of making mistakes.
Don't be afraid of potential
heartbreak in this process.
>>ANDREW: Well, listen to Rumi.
Can I quote--
>>REGINA: Yes.
Oh, please.
>>ANDREW: Quote to
Kabir, but these
are the two great kahunas.
These are the big--
>>REGINA: They're the big guys.
>>ANDREW: They're the big guys.
And Rumi says, "The
grapes of my body
can only become wine after
the winemaker tramples me.
I surrender my body like
grapes to his trampling,
so my inmost heart can
blaze and dance with joy.
And although the grapes go on
sobbing blood and screaming,
I cannot bear anymore anguish,
I cannot bear anymore cruelty,
the trampler stuffs cotton
in his ears and says,
it is I who am the
master of this work.
You can deny me if you want.
You have every excuse.
But when, through my passion,
you reach perfection,
you will never be done
praising my name."
The whole story of
our time is in that.
>>REGINA: The whole story.
>>ANDREW: We need
to surrender, so
that we can be taught
the deep meaning of what
we're going through.
It won't be easy.
There will be moments
when we scream and shout.
>>REGINA: Our grapes
are going to be crushed.
>>ANDREW: They're
going to be crushed,
but new wine is being
pressed from that crushing.
>>REGINA: Oh, that
is so beautiful.
>>ANDREW: And when we taste
it-- and I have tasted it
in this life.
I know that I'm not
exaggerating or lying.
I'm here to help people, at
this moment, die into life.
So that they can know what I
and so many others now know,
which is that there is a new
life coming for the world.
A vast, amazing, utterly,
extraordinary, new kind
of humanity being born.
And we're going to go
through Hell to get there,
but the doors are open to
that unbelievable possibility.
>>REGINA: That is so beautiful.
I could say, cut, we're done.
We're not even going to
finish this interview.
>>ANDREW: It's true.
>>REGINA: Thank you for sharing
the poem from Rumi but also,
for sharing your own extension
of that because you're right.
Everybody can feel
the correctness in it.
So it almost feels tedious to
go through the rest of the talk,
but we're going to.
>>ANDREW: Oh, we'll
make it something.
>>REGINA: So, I want to go back
to something we talked about
in the beginning.
And that is in the classically
new age, which is dying.
That's dying.
>>ANDREW: Thank God.
Yes.
>>REGINA: Thank God.
There was--
>>ANDREW: I've done
everything I can to inter it.
>>REGINA: Yes, oh, boy you have.
Yes, you have.
To tear it down.
But there's a
denial as you've put
it-- denial of harsher
realities using fake compassion
and cheerfulness and too easily
giving forgiveness, which makes
it hard to tell the truth.
>>ANDREW: Right.
>>REGINA: Talk about
those statements.
>>ANDREW: There's
a great difference
between happiness and joy.
Happiness comes and goes.
Joy comes from deep
connection with the source.
And I think that New Agers
have made a Devil's bargain
because fundamentally,
they've wanted
to be happy and cheerful.
And that has meant
for them excluding
the horror, the pain, the agony
that is actually happening.
But in excluding the
horror and the pain
and the agony, what they
haven't gone through
is the kind of
process that breaks
you open to radical
compassion and makes
you far humbler and far
more truly initiated
into the source,
which brings joy.
>>REGINA: I was going to say,
it allows you access to joy.
>>ANDREW: So you think
you're preaching joy
but you don't know
what real joy is.
>>REGINA: Joy is so much
deeper than happiness.
>>ANDREW: It's so much deeper.
And if you really say as so
often in the new age you hear,
"don't judge," you're
really being absurd.
You don't judge in the sense
of don't hate and don't ever
exclude anybody from the
possibility of transformation.
But see clearly that some people
have chosen very dark things
and are doing very, very
dark and dangerous action.
>>REGINA: That needs
to be recognized
and acknowledged, yes.
>>ANDREW: And that needs to be
recognized but without hatred.
You don't have to despise them.
But you do have to recognize
what they're up to.
Otherwise, they can potentially
destroy, at this moment,
the whole human enterprise.
Let's get real.
>>REGINA: We have a lot of
sociopaths, psychopaths,
narcissists, and authoritarian
figures on the world
stage right now.
And we need to be aware of it.
This is global.
>>ANDREW: It's global.
>>REGINA: Because it's
a global phenomenon.
It's a cosmic phenomena.
>>ANDREW: But it's also part
of what this crisis is about.
The Mother is saying
to us, don't be stupid.
Don't be blind.
See that some people, out
of vanity and delusion,
have chosen the dark.
Realize the dark is powerful.
And realize that
through their choices,
they are now threatening
the future of humanity.
Don't hate them.
They are my children.
They are your
brothers and sisters,
but be very clear about
your responsibility.
And your responsibility
is to choose truth.
Choose justice.
Turn up as humble
sacred activists,
and do everything in
your power to prevent
them destroying everything.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>ANDREW: And if you turn up
like that, I will help you.
And you will see
that together, we
can build a much more
harmonious and just world.
And help these people
who have chosen the dark.
Overcome their crazy appetites
and become humble, loving
communers with me.
That's what she's saying to us.
>>REGINA: Yes, absolutely.
Now, speaking of
the feminine, OK?
>>ANDREW: Yeah.
>>REGINA: The Great Mother.
I'm going to-- we'll
talk about something
that's I found
interesting in the moment.
This man, Andrea
Villa, a man who
works with other men in
raising consciousness
said to me-- whenever
I would see him,
I'd say, how are you doing?
Are you happy these days?
And one day, he said, stop
asking me-- he's Italian.
Stop asking me if I'm happy.
Men aren't happy.
We experience a lot of things,
but happiness is the thing
that women wish to experience.
That's not what men
are looking for.
>>ANDREW: Oh.
>>REGINA: They're
looking for meaning.
They're looking for
substance or joy.
passion and so forth.
But happiness was relegated
to a different category,
in his mind, that only
women participate in.
>>ANDREW: How crazy.
I think he has a
ghost of the truth.
I think what men are really
looking for is a quest.
Something that they can pull
their whole being into that's
noble.
And that is really
going to help.
I think that's what the
deepest and richest men
want more than anything.
>>REGINA: And I think
that was at the basis
of his teaching with other men.
And he was quite interesting,
but that was just sort
of a shocking statement to me.
You say we're not looking
for happiness per se,
but they were looking for
these other, as you say,
to this fulfillment
in life that can
feel as though it's beyond
our grasp and create despair.
>>ANDREW: Right.
>>REGINA: Women.
It's a little different with us.
We have, a different
sensibility when
it comes to the collective.
>>ANDREW: Right.
>>REGINA: So we're more
wired perhaps to nature
in the collective
on certain levels.
But this need for
harmony, peace--
we call it happiness
amongst our tribe--
our household, our
friendships, and so
forth is of tantamount
importance to women.
We don't distinguish
between happiness and joy
per se, even though in
your speaking of it,
you can feel the difference,
but we need both.
>>ANDREW: We need both.
And one of the great
characteristics
of our time-- and I'm
sure you know this and see
this-- is how many utterly,
amazing women are rising up
as leaders.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>ANDREW: Especially
African American women.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>ANDREW: At this moment.
Just saying, we are here
to guide us through.
So there's a way in which
you could bring those two
statements together, and it
might be something like this.
It's that men need to realize
that the goals that they set
themselves, the noble goals,
should be in protection
of life and cherishing of life.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>ANDREW: And women
are the ones they need
to learn that cherishing from.
The divine feminine will
teach them the truths of life,
and then their goals
won't be destructive.
They'll just be further in the--
>>REGINA: In the
service of life.
>>ANDREW: --growth of life.
Yes.
>>REGINA: Yes.
OK.
Now, here's another
area you talk about.
"To go through
this, we have to--
and I thought it was a
very interesting phrase--
negotiate extremely,
stressful ambiguity--"
>>ANDREW: Oh, yes.
>>REGINA: "--all all times."
I chose things that to
me, I thought I really
want to hear your explanation.
"While remaining in a
radical state of unknowing."
>>ANDREW: Yes.
>>REGINA: So explain this to us.
We're not going to get very far,
and I've got so many questions.
But this is--
you're so wonderful.
>>ANDREW: You've chosen
wonderful things.
>>REGINA: So tell us about that.
"To negotiate extremely,
stressful ambiguity while
remaining in a state
of radical unknowing."
And why this is so uncomfortable
for people to not know.
>>ANDREW: We've been
brought up in a culture that
is a fix-it culture that demands
solutions and clarities as it
demands waffles.
That has had a tremendous effect
and given us a lot of power.
But it has made us, in some
ways, profoundly spiritually
stupid because the divine
is beyond any concept
and any dogma that
we could ever create.
And the only way in
which you're going
to be endlessly
expanded in wisdom
is by understanding
that you don't know.
And resting in what the mystics
call "unknowing knowing."
Being at home with not knowing.
Knowing that if you can stay
in that humble position,
you'll be given what you
need to know to go forward.
>>REGINA: And you'll
know how to respond.
>>ANDREW: And you'll
know how to respond
because instead of bringing
to the moment or the problem,
all of your assumptions, all
of your passionate desire
to have everything
cleaned up immediately--
you'll be bringing the fullness
of your humble, clear presence.
And in that humility
and in that clarity,
you'll be given, by the divine,
these solutions, which you
could not have imagined before.
That's been my experience.
It's the experience
of all mystics.
But it's the key to how
to get through this period
because one of the things this
dark night is revealing to us
is that any solutions that we
make out of the consciousness
that we're in at
the moment, however
noble and intelligent
it may be, are not
going to work because
that consciousness is
what's going to be transformed.
So, knowing that-- and
that's very tough to accept.
If you just surrender,
as the poem by Rumi
suggests-- it's essential.
Surrender in unknowing trust.
You'll find that you'll
be given the equilibrium
and the spaciousness to
see things as they are
and to respond from your
own innate divine wisdom
in ways that will shock
you by their effectiveness.
But everybody has to
discover that for themselves.
But when they do,
it's so thrilling.
>>REGINA: Yes.
OK.
So the antithesis
of that right now.
You're bringing up all these
beautiful things about humanity
and where we're headed.
And I'm kind of tossing
in the challenges we face.
>>ANDREW: Oh, God.
Yes.
Well, as you know, I've written
a lot about those challenges.
>>REGINA: Yes, you have.
Being in this humble state
of not knowing and accepting
the ambiguity until the answers
come, the opposite of that
is an explosion of
mental-emotional disorders
such as narcissism.
>>ANDREW: Yes.
>>REGINA: How and why?
Why is that becoming--
>>ANDREW: Well, because
people are in a--
>>REGINA: --so center stage.
>>ANDREW: --dreadful panic.
They are desperate at all this
destruction and dissolution.
And if they don't find
the mystical guidance that
is being offered, they
are going to retreat
into authoritarianism, into
fantasy, into delusion,
into narcissism into denial.
>>REGINA: Lack of empathy.
>>ANDREW: Lack of empathy.
>>REGINA: Lack of compassion.
>>ANDREW: That's
why I'm working.
That's why all of
us, who are trying
to be midwives of the new
world are working overtime
at this moment to try
and help people get
to the much richer realities.
Otherwise, they'll be threatened
by these solutions, which
will only make
extinction more likely
and not help us at this moment.
>>REGINA: No.
OK.
So let's go through
the four R's, OK?
We'll go into them because
this is the helpful part here.
>>ANDREW: This is the real part.
Yeah.
>>REGINA: Reconnection.
>>ANDREW: We need to
reconnect with our source.
We need to reconnect
with nature.
with each other
as sacred friends and
sacred companions.
We need to reconnect
with animals.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>ANDREW: If we do this
rich work of reconnection--
>>REGINA: Trees.
>>ANDREW: --we will become
much wider and more spacious
and have-- find that we
have far, far more strength
available to us because the
whole universe is trying
to help us at this moment.
The divine knows exactly
what we've created out
of our madness but is
offering us simple ways
to really, really get
down with what can truly
inspire and strengthen us.
And reconnection
is the beginning.
>>REGINA: You mentioned
nature, and something just
popped into my mind.
Seems tangential
but maybe not as we
know from the existence
of homeopathy.
>>ANDREW: Yes.
>>REGINA: But that the waters of
this planet are, by the moment,
taking in cosmic information.
>>ANDREW: Yes.
>>REGINA: We don't stop
and think about the waters
as being an embodiment of
this cosmic knowledge at all.
We just put some chlorine in it,
purify it, and turn on the tap.
>>ANDREW: We have a totally
objectivist view of everything,
and it's tragic.
>>REGINA: I can't help but
think that exposing ourselves
to the natural bodies
of water on the planet
can't help but be incredibly
fulfilling and uplifting
on an auric level, a physical
level, and spiritual level.
>>ANDREW: But nature
on every level.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>ANDREW: If you do reconnect
with adoration with nature--
Rumi said something
so wonderful.
He said, adore the
beloved, and the beloved
will reveal to you that
each thing that exists
is one drop from the beloved's
river of infinite beauty.
So if you reconnect
with a tree or an animal
or a plant with that
degree of tender,
humble, unknowing
adoration, you already
are coming into connection with
the cosmic force of creativity.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>ANDREW: It enhances
your whole being.
>>REGINA: Now, we
go to resistance.
>>ANDREW: Resistance.
We need to resist
the tendencies in us
for limited, separate
thought and action.
We need to resist the
sides of ourselves that
don't care, that
want to be paralyzed,
that don't want to
face what's happening.
>>REGINA: That want
to make enemies.
>>ANDREW: Don't want
Don't want to stand up
for the truth and justice.
And that takes courage.
But reconnection will give
you the courage to resist.
And we need to stand
up when necessary
against those who are trying
to destroy the experiment.
>>REGINA: Resilience.
>>ANDREW: Resilience comes from
reconnection and resistance,
because when you reconnect
deeply with the source
and realize that
you are being asked
to resist your own dark impulses
and to stand up for justice
in the world, you
discover that you're
so much stronger than you
ever imagined you could be.
And you discover also that
there are others there,
who will help you,
and who will join you,
and who will dance with
you, and who will love you,
and who will encourage you.
And through that discovery,
you become resilient.
You become able
to dance with life
instead of trying to impose
your own pattern upon life.
And you discover that
you are able to weather
much more grief, and difficulty,
and heartbreak, and pain
than you ever knew you were.
>>REGINA: And with
more grace and harmony.
And you bring up in
the book because you
were raised in India the
first nine years of your life.
And it's a special
place in your heart.
And you talk about
how there where people
are living with almost nothing.
How easily they share
and joyfully they share.
>>ANDREW: The Indian
poor are my teachers.
They are the most resilient
people in the world.
They are the most joyful.
>>REGINA: --resourceful.
Creative.
>>ANDREW: Yes.
And that resilience--
you're right.
How wonderful that
you brought that up
because one of the things
that makes the Indian poor so
resilient is their true
compassion for each other
and their willingness
to do everything
they can to help each other.
I have a great friend
who's a rickshaw driver.
He makes perhaps $2 a day.
I help his family, but I
have been so overwhelmed
by the love they all share.
They are all there
for each other
every moment of every day.
And they are resilient as have--
they really are extraordinary.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Yeah, I--
>>ANDREW: And that's
the place where
we're going to go to, too.
>>REGINA: It's so beautiful.
>>ANDREW: It is beautiful,
but it's more than beautiful.
It's the key to how
the human race can
survive this terrible passage.
>>REGINA: Being there
for one another truly.
>>ANDREW: Being there.
And cultivating and encouraging.
>>REGINA: --service.
>>ANDREW: Exactly.
>>REGINA: Yes.
OK.
And finally, we come
to regeneration.
And here, I have the question.
Who do I want to be in
this difficult time?
>>ANDREW: With regeneration,
in the way that I've
been exploring it in this
book, "Radical Regeneration,"
has many, many
different meanings.
The deepest meaning is the
goal for this huge, dark night.
The goal is the birth of an
embodied divine humanity.
It's the second
coming, which is not
going to be the
return of some avatar
but the rising of the golden
yeast of love consciousness
and millions of beings.
And this transformation we
know from the great mystics
is not just a transformation of
consciousness or of the heart.
It's also going to be a
transformation of the body.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>ANDREW: So, as we
cultivate reconnection,
as we cultivate resistance,
as we experience resilience,
we are entering this
evolutionary mystery
in which we're going
to be transformed
in mind, heart, soul, and body.
And with the powers
that come in the course
of that amazing transformation--
>>REGINA: Truly,
longer life span--
>>ANDREW: We'll be regenerated.
>>REGINA: Increased
strength and vitality.
>>ANDREW: Exactly.
But the powers that we have
of intelligence and passion
and truth--
they will help us.
Not only regenerate ourselves
but regenerate our whole way
of being and doing everything.
>>REGINA: Yes, everything.
>>ANDREW: Everything.
>>REGINA: So I want to get to
this before we sign off today.
And it's that the
Western world has lost
sight of the wisdom of elders.
>>ANDREW: Yes.
>>REGINA: And you say
this is at our own peril?
>>ANDREW: Yes.
>>REGINA: And this has
to be reestablished?
>>ANDREW: Yes.
>>REGINA: But we don't
want the old way,
and we don't want
charlatans, and we
don't want things by rote.
So talk about it
in a complex form
of finding the elders that
have the wisdom we need now.
>>ANDREW: Elders aren't
just older people.
There are some elders I
know who are in their 20s.
>>REGINA: It's true.
>>ANDREW: And it's
really respecting wisdom,
and respecting, and
listening for people
who will tell us the truth in
an encouraging and loving way.
They are the elders whether
they're 22 or 35 or 85.
There's three things that
characterize a real elder.
The first is that the real
elder will not flatter you
because the real elder knows
that if they flatter you,
they are endangering you.
They will tell you the truth
in a simple, clear way.
The second thing that
a real elder will do
is to radiate love, compassion,
and encouragement because they
know from their own experience
that however tough things are,
if you rise to the challenge
humbly and receptive to grace,
you will be fed
strengths that you need.
And the third thing that
the elder will be and do
is to be there for you.
They'll say, you don't have
to do this on your own.
I'm here, and we're all
here in this together,
and we're going
to do it together.
Those three things.
And those can be in any age, but
those are the three qualities
that we really now
need in our leaders,
in our guides, everything.
But there's some amazing
elders on the planet.
Think of Jane Goodall.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Yes.
>>ANDREW: Think
of the Dalai Lama.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>ANDREW: Here they are.
We must get with them
because they have everything
to offer us at this moment.
And this is what I'm trying to
be at this moment of my life.
>>REGINA: And you are.
>>ANDREW: A joyful elder.
>>REGINA: Well, and also, my
final point here that you make,
and that is to be
a sacred warrior.
>>ANDREW: Yes.
>>REGINA: And midwife.
>>REGINA: During this process.
>>ANDREW: Both.
>>REGINA: Both?
>>ANDREW: Yes.
>>REGINA: Yes.
So you are that?
>>ANDREW: Well, I hope so.
>>REGINA: But let's
talk about the nature
of the spiritual warrior
before we say goodbye.
>>ANDREW: Well, I say,
be a midwife warrior.
And that means for
me bring together
in yourself the deepest
compassion with the greatest
possible courage.
So it's not being just a
midwife or just a warrior.
It's being a midwife,
who is birthing the new
and standing up for it,
and being a warrior that
is attuned to the
sacred feminine,
to life at the deepest
level, protecting--
>>REGINA: And to be--
>>ANDREW: Life.
>>REGINA: --of service to that.
>>ANDREW: To be of
service to that.
So, I believe that the new
humanity will be in the deepest
sense, androgynous.
It will be neither
male nor female.
We'll go beyond
those categories.
And each being will fuse,
in their own unique way,
the deepest sacred feminine
with the wisest and kindest,
sacred masculine.
>>REGINA: Well
that's when we reach
that ultimate enlightenment
as the human species.
>>ANDREW: Right.
>>REGINA: Certainly.
>>ANDREW: But that's the goal.
And we can start working
towards that goal right now.
Anybody listening
can start that.
>>REGINA: And it means
letting go the patriarchy.
Gone.
Bye.
>>ANDREW: Bye bye.
Well, the patriarchy is--
>>REGINA: Gone.
>>ANDREW: Obviously.
>>REGINA: No, it's got to go.
>>ANDREW: It's going to cling
to its power, but it's over.
>>REGINA: Oh, my God.
>>ANDREW: In the heart-mind
of God, it is finished.
>>REGINA: Right now.
And the final thing you
say I love, which is,
act in a noble way
as best you can
because nobility is contagious.
>>ANDREW: Yes.
>>REGINA: I love that.
Andrew, I love you.
I love your wisdom and
your oratory abilities
to be able to convey things
in a way that we can hear.
Just beautiful.
And not only that, you just
become richer and wiser
with the years.
>>ANDREW: Thank you.
>>REGINA: --more
beautiful with the years.
So I just want to be--
>>ANDREW: Polished.
>>REGINA: Thank you.
>>ANDREW: Thank you.
>>REGINA: Thank you for taking
the time to be here and also,
for having written this
book and continuing
to be that sacred
warrior and midwife.
>>ANDREW: Thank you.
>>REGINA: And because
you're showing
the way for the rest of us.
Thank you.
Again, the title of the book
is "Radical Regeneration:
Sacred Activism and the
Renewal for our World."
You can find it at
major booksellers.
You might also want to watch my
previous interview with Andrew
here in the Gaia Archives.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."
[AUDIO LOGO]